MEDITATION ON VISHNU
One should meditate on Vishnu, dressed in white robes, moon-
c oloured, four-armed, with a cheerful face, for the removal of all
obstacles.
T he elephant faced one, along with his innumerable attendants,
would always remove obstacles, as we depend on Vishvaksena.
I salute Vyasa, the great grandson of Vasishta, the grandson of
Shakti, the immaculate son of Parasara, the father of Shukata, the
treasure of austerities.
2O Vyasa in the form of Vish nu, O Vishnu in the form of Vyasa, O
Vasishta, the treasure of the Brahman, I offer my obeisances
unto Thee again and again.
avikārāya śuddhāya nityāya paramātmane,
Bow I before Vishnu, Who is pure, Who is not affected, Who is
permanent, Who is the ultimate truth, and He who wins over all
the mortals in this world.
Obeisance to that Vishnu, the all-powerful Vishnu, whose
remembrance alone frees one from the bondage of birth and
death.
Sri Vaisampayana said:
Having heard the Dharma in its entirety and the holy ones in all
3respects, Yudhisthira again addressed Shantanu.
Yudhishthira asked:
Is there one god in this world, or is there one devotee? Whom do
men attain to good by praising and worshiping?
Which Dharma do you consider to be the supreme of all
Dharma? By chanting what is a creature freed from the bondage
of birth and death?
Bhishma replied:
Praising the Lord of the universe, the God of gods, the infinite
Supreme Personality of Godhead, with a thousand names, the
4man ever rises.
And worshiping Him alone with devotion, meditating on the
inexhaustible Purusha, praising and bowing down to Him alone,
and offering sacrifices to Him alone, the worshipper, the
aspirant (is freed).
By praising Vishnu, the eternally immortal, the great Lord of all
the worlds, the presiding deity of the worlds, one can pass
beyond all sorrows.
He is the Brahman, the knower of all religions, the enhancer of
t he fame of the worlds, the Lord of the worlds, the great being,
the origin of all beings.
This is the Dharma which I consider to be the highest of all
D harma, that one should always worship the lotus-eyed Lord
with devotion and hymns.
He is the supreme great light, He is the supreme great ruler.
He is the supreme great Brahman (Absolute), He is the supreme
highest goal.
He who is holy among the holy and auspicious among the
auspicious, who is God among the gods and who is the
inexhaustible Father of all beings.
F rom Him all creatures proceed in the beginning of an age,
And in Him they are absorbed again at the end of the age.
tasya lōkapradhānasya jagannāthasya bhūpate,
Of that Chief of the world, of the Lord of the universe, O King
(Yudhishthira),
Of Vishnu, hear from me the thousand names, which remove all
sin and fear.
Those famous names of the Great Soul which bring out His
m anifold qualities celebrated by rishs (seers) I shall declare for
the good (of all).
The rishi of the thousand names is Vedavyasa, the great
contemplative sage;
The metre is Anushtup, and the deity is the blessed son of
Devaki.
7The seed is He-who-was-born-in-the-lunar-race;
Its power is The Name, The-son-of-Devakī.
T he heart is the One-who-is-lauded-by-the-three-Sama-hymns,
The purpose of its use is the attainment of peace.
Om; Vishnu, Conqueror, Great Vishnu, Creator, the Great Lord,
To Him of many forms, the Destroyer of demons, to the Supreme
Person, I bow.
śrīvedavyāsa uvāca:
śrī viśvarūpa iti dhyānam,
Vedavyasa said:
Of this garland of mantras (constituting) the praise-song of the
divine thousand names of Vishnu,
The blessed Vedavyasa is the seer,
Krishna, the Supreme Self, is the deity,
The metre is Anushtup,
"Having His source in the Self, Self-begotten" is the seed,
"The son of Devaka, the Creator and Sustainer," is the Power,
"He whose glory is sung in the three types of Sama songs; the
theme of such songs
He who manifests Himself as the Sama Veda" is the heart,
"The Bearer of the conch, He of the word, He of the discus" is the
nail,
"He of the Sharnga bow, the Wielder of the mace" is the weapon,
"The One holding the reins of a chariot in His hands (Krishna),
who is imperturbable" is the armour,
"The source, the vibration, God" is the supreme mantra
Let us engage ourselves in the japa of the divine thousand names
of Vishnu for the purpose of pleasing Great Vishnu.
9ATHA DHYĀNAM
In the region of the ocean of milk, seated on a garland of pure
gems and pearls, adorned with pearls resembling crystal gems,
with white clouds, with rains of free nectar, delighting us, may
the lotus and mace of the holy mountains, holding a conch, be
our joy.
namāmi. (2)
10I bow before that God, Vishnu,
Who is the lord of three worlds,
Who has earth as his feet,
Who has air as his soul,
Who has sky as his belly,
Who has moon and sun as eyes,
Who has the four directions as ears,
Who has the land of gods as head,
Who has fire as his mouth,
Who has sea as his stomach,
And in whose belly play and enjoy,
Gods, men birds, animals, Serpent men,
Gandharvas and Asuras.
I bow before the God Vishnu,
Who is personification of peace,
Who sleeps on his folded arms,
Who has a lotus on his belly,
Who is the God of gods,
Who is the basis of earth,
Who is like the sky,
Who is of the colour of the cloud,
Who has beautiful limbs,
Who is the consort of Lakshmi,
Who has lotus like eyes,
Who is seen by saints through thought,
11W ho kills all worries and fears,
And who is the lord of all the worlds.
I bow before that God Vishnu,
Who is the lord of all the universe,
Who is black like a cloud,
Who wears yellow silks,
Who has the sreevatsa on him,
Whose limbs shine because of Kousthubha,
Who has eyes like an open lotus,
And who is surrounded by the blessed always.
Obeisance to Vishnu, the origin of all beings, the sustainer of the
earth, the form of many forms, the originator.
I bow before the God Vishnu,
Who has four arms,
Who has a conch and wheel in his hands,
Who wears a crown and ear globes,
Who wears yellow silks,
Who has lotus like eyes,
Who shines because of Kousthbha gem worn on his garlanded
chest.
I seek refuge in Lord Krishna,
Who is with Rukhmani and Satyabhama,
Who sits on a golden throne in the shade of Parijata tree,
Who is of the colour of the black cloud,
Who has long broad eyes,
Who has a face like moon,
W ho has four hands,
And who has a chest adorned by Sreevatsa.
13STOTRAM — 1000 NAMES
yajnas.
and beyond the past, present and the future.
universe.
8. universe.
Bhūtātmā: The essence of all beings.
12. Pūtātmā: One whose nature is purity/who is purity.
Paramātmā: He who is the supreme one and the Atman.
14. ones.
the above-mentioned Yoga.
and Purusha or Jiva.
23. lion are combined.
24. Śrimān: One on whose chest the goddess Shri always dwells.
whom the whole universe becomes merged and remains in
31. seminal condition at the time of Pralaya or cosmic
32. dissolution.
Jivas for them to enjoy.
Bhartā: One who supports the universe as its substratum.
36. birth. Or one who has exalted births as incarnations.
things.
39. other.
Pushkara or lotus.
Veda.
44. nor death.
45. Dhātā: One who is the support of the universe.
Vidhātā: He who generates Karmas and their fruits.
by any of the accepted means of knowledge like sense,
perception, inference etc.
control the senses subsist.
the source of the universe, stands.
ones, i.e. the Devas.
Viśvakarmā: He whose Karma (work) has resulted in all that
51. exists (Vishvam) or He whose power of creation is unique
52. and wonderful.
the time of cosmic dissolution.
substantiality.
taken as a single phrase, the name along with its
qualification.
57. knowledge or conceived by the mind.
dissolution.
omnipotence, omniscience etc.
62. Tri-kakub-dhāma: He who is the support (dharma) of the
three regions above, below and in the middle.
67. energy.
Ishvara.
72. creator.
fit to be known through Madhu-Vidya.
77. Vikramī: The courageous One.
Dhanvī: One armed with bow.
78. Medhāvī: He who has great intelligence capable of grasping
all texts.
samsara. Or one who has Vih, bird i.e. Garuda as His mount.
Kramana or crossing of the ocean of samsara by devotees, or
80. because from Him all Krama or manifestation of the universe,
81. has taken place.
done (Kruta) by Jivas. Also one who is pleased even with
83. those who offer such simple offerings as leaves, flowers,
fruits and water.
efforts or works.
Ātmavān: One established in his own greatness i.e. requiring
no other support than Himself.
87. greatest of those who bestow good.
89. Śarma: One who is of the nature of supreme bliss.
93. Samvasara or a year.
(consciousness).
assumed all forms, the eye-sight of all beings is His.
97. Ajah: One who has no birth.
102. inherent nature and powers.
103. Ameyātmā: One whose form or nature cannot be measured
and determined.
all beings.
indicates greatness. So it means one possessed of a great
106. mind i.e. a mind free from attachments, anger and other evil
107. qualities.
108. Samātmā: One whose mind is Sama, without partiality or
anger and thus the same towards all beings.
occurring together, can be split in two ways – as samātmā +
bear ample fruits.
112. the lotus of the heart. Or One whose eyes resemble the
petals of a lotus.
Dharma.
Dharma.
116. dissolution.
120. purifying to be heard.
122. established, unchanging.
of the nature of knowledge is of great potency.
of their material cause.
everything.
127. scattered.
Vedavid: One who knows the Veda and its meaning.
131. great attributes and is free from every defect.
Vedavit: One who knows all the Vedas.
Divinities of all regions.
136. (Dharma) and demerits (Adharma) of beings by bestwing
their due rewards on all beings.
and also a non-effect as their cause.
138. Caturātmā: One who for the sake of creation, sustentation
139. and dissolution assumes forms.
Nisimha.
143. Bhojanam: Prakruti or Maya is called Bhojanam or what is
enjoyed by the Lord.
144. Bhoktā: As he, purusha, enjoys the prakruti, He is called the
enjoyer or Bhokta.
Sahishnu.
147. Himself at the beginning of creation.
148. virtue of his six special excellences like omnipotence,
omniscience etc. known as Bhagas.
149. Jetā: One who is naturally victorious over beings, i.e.
150. superior to all beings.
as the Jivas.
154. begging to Bali.
attributes like omnipotence, omniscience etc.
160. be created.
without the transformation involved in birth and death.
stations.
Mokshas.
knowledge.
166. Sadāyogī: One who is ever experienceble, being ever
existent.
167. Vīrahā: One who destroys heroic Asuras for the protection
of Dharma.
169. knowledge.
great illusionists.
sustentation and dissolution.
176. which is the cause of Samsara is His great power.
without.
179. as: 'He is this', because He cannot be objectively known.
Śrīmān: One endowed with greatness of every kind.
180. Ameyātmā: The Spirit with intelligence that cannot be
measured by any one.
'Mandara' at the time of the churning of the Milk Ocean and
also Govardhana in his Krishna incarnation.
183. Mahībhartā: One who held up the earth submerged in
Pralaya waters.
nature, dwells.
attainable, to all holy men.
one or anything from manifesting in various forms.
giving them power. Therefore sages call the Govinda.
Govid. He who is the master of words is indicated by this
name.
persons endowed with such qualities.
191. punishments on those who tread the path of
unrighteousness.
who practise the sense of identity with Him.
and Adharma.
move on Bhujas or arms, that is, serpents. The great
194. serpents like Ananta and Vasuki are the powers of Vishnu,
so he has come to have this name.
creation Brahmā.
Badarikashrama as Nara and Narayana.
lotus.
201. inherent wisdom.
202. Sandhātā: One who unites the Jivas with the fruits of their
actions.
203. Sandhimān: One who is Himself the enjoyer of the fruits of
204. actions.
So the name means One who goes into the hearts of
205. devotees or One who throws the evil Asuras to a distance,
206. i.e. destroys them.
207. Śasta: One who instructs and directs all through the
scriptures.
208. Vishrutatma: One who is specially known through signifying
terms like Truth, Knowledge, etc.
Surārihā: One who destroys the enemies of Suras or Devas.
212. knowledge.
213. Dhāma: The Supreme Light.
217. Sragvī: One who has on Him the necklace called Vaijayanti,
which is strung with the subtle aspects of the five elements.
knowledge, He is called so. As his intellect perceives
everything, He is Udaradhih. Both these epithets together
constitute one name.
status.
221. the collectivity of all beings.
Śrīmān: One more resplendent than everything.
223. knowing and which leads one to the truth of Non-duality.
Netā: One who moves this world of becoming.
224. Sahasramūrdhā: One with a thousand, i.e. innumerable,
heads.
226. beings functioning.
227. Viśvātmā: The soul of the universe.
Sahasrapāt: One with a thousand, i.e. innumerable legs.
chakra, the wheel of Samsara or worldy existence.
bondage of Samsara.
ignorance.
232. all beings through His Vibhutis (power manifestation like
Rudra, Yama etc.).
succession of day and night.
235. Devas in sacrifices.
elephants of the quarters, etc.
237. wonderful, because He gives salvation to Sisupala and
others who try to harm Him.
238. Prasannātmā: One whose mind is never contaminated by
239. Rajas or Tamas.
240. Viśvabhug: One who eats up or enjoys or protects the
241. worlds.
Satkartā: One who offers benefits.
244. adoration.
of dissolution.
having His residence in all beings.
called Nara.
name and form.
249. Aprameyātmā: One whose nature cannot be grasped by any
250. of the means of knowledge.
252. protects shishtas or good men.
fulfilled.
who practise disciplines, in accordance with their eligibility.
deserve the same.
pray for.
260. observances of the nature of Dharma, to those who want to
261. attain the supreme state.
264. universe.
and sentences flow.
worlds.
none else can do.
268. Vāgmi: One from whom the words constituting the Veda
come out.
270. is the God of all gods.
that of a Boar.
Yajna.
277. vigour and brilliance.
Prakāśātmā: One whose form is radiant.
manifestations like the Sun.
(knowledge), Vairagya (renunciation) etc.
manifesting sound of the Lord, is Spashta or high pitched.
Sama, Yajus etc., or one who is known through Mantras.
because just as the moon-light gives relief to men burnt in
282. the heat of the sun, He gives relief and shelter to those who
are subjected to the heat of Samsara.
284. Amrutamshu or the Moon originated at the time of the
285. churning of the Milk-ocean.
hare, that is the Moon.
do good.
great disease of Samsara.
Samsara.
righteousness, omniscience, puissance, etc. are all true.
292. the beings of the past, future and present.
Ana or Prana as Himself.
295. Kāmahā: One who destroys the desire-nature in seekers
after liberation.
297. devotees.
attain the four supreme values of life.
devotees.
Yuga.
four Yugas beginning with Satya Yuga.
Maya, not one only.
Kalpa.
organs of knowledge.
universe can be clearly perceived.
307. Sahasrajit: One who is victorious over innumerable enemies
of the Devas in battle.
Anantajit: One who, being endowed with all powers, is
310. supreme Bliss.
312. used it as a decoration for His crown when he adopted the
form of a cowherd (Gopa).
314. means bondage.
Krōdhahā: One who eradicates anger in virtuous people.
evil people.
got all beings as His arms.
name means one who supports the earth or receives all
forms of worship.
beginning with birth.
creation of the worlds etc.
Prana.
Devas and Asuras and also destroys them by withdrawing it.
Indra (Vasava) in His incarnation as Vamana.
325. ocean.
fruits of actions to those who are entiled to them.
own greatness.
path.
331. beings in the form of birth etc.
333. atmospheres beginning with Avaha.
Devas.
338. hunger, thirst, birth and death.
in the womb, birth, old age, death etc.
340. supreme satisfactions of life – Dharma, Artha, Kama and
Moksha.
342. Vasudeva.
favorable to all, for no one will act against oneself.
345. incarnations.
Padmī: One having Padma or lotus in his hands.
part of the heart-lotus.
Lotus.
middle of the heart-lotus.
351. strengthening them in the form of Anna (Food) and Prana.
Mahardhi: One who has enormous Ruddhi or prosperity.
353. world.
sustentation and dissolution.
in Yajnas.
through all criteria of knowledge i.e. Paramatma.
always residing.
Rohita.
Moksha or Liberation.
cause of the universe.
369. disciplines like self-control.
mountain.
372. supreme felicities.
Vegavān: One of tremendous speed.
Dissolution.
the Purusha and Prakriti and caused agitation.
other cosmic activities.
unique manifestation as Samsara has its existence.
means one who hold sway over all beings.
380. generation of this universe.
382. Kartā: One who is free and is therefore one's own master.
Vikartā: One who makes this unique universe.
be known by anybody.
power of Maya.
universe rests.
dissolution.
389. like Dhruva according to their Karma.
exalted type.
391. 'Ma' or Lakshmi dwells. Or one who is the greatest of all
392. beings without any other's help.
on all beings that is, gives liberation to those who want
Moksha and enjoyments to those who are after it, and also
cuts asunder the knots of the heart by eliminating all
doubts.
delight.
397. place.
Being through spiritual realization.
401. of spiritual illumination.
404. all powerful beings like Brahma.
is called so because all the scriptures consisting of Shrutis
and Smrutis form His commandments.
406. categories is Vikuntha. He who is the agent of it is
407. Vaikunthah.
409. or one who functions in the form of vital force called Prana.
411. made with Om.
413. coloured egg out of which Brahma was born.
degeneration from His original nature.
indicated by the word Ritu or season.
419. knowledge, bestows the most auspicious fruit Moksha.
sky of the heart.
421. sides by those who seek refuge in Him. Or one who grasps
422. or receives the offerings made by devotees.
aspirants who seek relief from the ocean of Samsara with its
425. waves of various tribulations in the from of Hunger, Thirst
etc., and difficulties like Avidya, pride, infatuation etc.
every one. Or One who is proficient in everything.
manifestation.
428. Sthavara, and in whom long lasting entities like earth are
429. established in Sthanu. The Lord is both these.
430. Bījamavyayam: One who is the seed or cause of Samsara
without Himself undergoing any change.
nature of bliss.
or end to seek.
Koshas like Annamaya, Pranamaya etc.
enjoyment.
wealth (Dhana) for His enjoyment.
self-fulfilled.
438. form of cosmic person.
to whom all the forms of Dharma, which are His own form
439. of worship, are attached, just as a sacrificial animal is
attached to a Yupa or a sacrificial post.
440. sacrifices deserve to be called great, because they well give
441. the fruit of Nirvana.
the modifications of the mind have dwindled.
sarvadarśī vimuktātmā sarvajñō jñānamuttamam. (48)
449. capable of giving the blessing of liberation.
are seekers of Moksha.
452. Sarva-darśī: One who by His inborn insight is able to see all
453. good and evil actions of living beings.
Vimuktātmā: One who is naturally free.
Jñānam-uttamam: That consciousness which is superior to
all, birthless, unlimited by time and space and the cause of
all achievements.
457. all refuge-seekers.
gross causes like sound etc.
460. who has got a deep and sonorous sound like the clouds.
463. incomparable blissful nature.
464. demonstrated in his destruction of Asuras for establishing
Vedic Dharma.
Dharma.
467. anything else, as He is the cause of the whole cosmic
468. process.
Vyāpī: One who interpenetrates everything like Akasha.
469. Naikātmā: One who manifests in different forms as the
subsidiary agencies causing the various cosmic processes.
471. in the process of creation, sustentation, etc.
Vatsī: One who protects those who are dear to Him.
474. found in its depths. As the Lord has taken the form of the
ocean, He is called by this name.
Dharmagub: One who protects Dharma.
477. performs Dharma in order to keep up the traditions in
478. respect of it.
479. Dharmī: One who upholds Dharma.
Sat: The Parabrahman who is of the nature of truth.
480. Asat: As the Aparabrahma has manifested as the world He is
481. called Asat (not having reality).
483. Aviñātā: One who is without the attributes of a Jiva or
vigyata like sense of agency, etc.
485. Vidhātā: One who is the unique support of all agencies like
Ananta who bear the whole universe.
rays as the Sun.
489. is luminous by nature.
self-knowledge.
important among them.
One who is the master of the earth.
496. Gōptā: One who is the protector of all beings.
combination of Karma and Jyana.
before anything else.
(elements) of which the body is made.
500. Bhōktā: One who protects. Or one who is the enjoyer of
infinite bliss.
Lord who is Indra and also one who manifested as Varaha or
the Boar in one of the incarnations. Or it signifies His Rama
incarnation in which He played the role of the master of the
monkeys.
offerings are made in Yajnas.
the Devata.
of one's own nature.
506. Purujit: One who gains victory over numerous people.
or great, and as He is the most important of all, He is Sattama.
true.
whom charitable offerings deserve to be made.
who gave it out or commented upon it.
body, is associated with the Pranas.
attitude of all devotees.
Devas down dwell.
518. Anantātmā: One who cannot be determined by space, time
and causation.
Dissolution into which all entities in the universe have been
dissolved.
523. born of Vishnu i.e. Kama Deva.
a beginning.
525. attachment, anger, etc. as also external enemies like Ravana,
Kumbhakarna etc.
527. immortal Bliss.
530. Satyadharmā: One whose knowledge and other attributes
are true.
world.
he was master of all the Vedas.
534. of an effect.
536. of waking, dream and sleep, which spring from the influence
537. of the Gunas.
Kruta or the manifested condition of the universe.
542. shape of His eternal associates.
543. esoteric knowledge conveyed by the Upanishads. Or one
who is hidden in the Guha or heart.
544. attributes like omniscience, lordliness, strength, prowess,
etc.
545. difficulty. One who is the witness of the three states of
546. waking, dreams and sleep as also their absence.
accomplishing works.
551. various incarnations.
oneself all beings at the time of cosmic Dissolution and
Acyuta is one who knows no fall from His real nature. They
50553. form one word with the first as the qualification – Acyuta
who is Sankarshana.
555. withdraws his rays into himself.
557. when meditated upon in the lotus of the heart. Or one who
has eyes resembling the lotus.
sustentation and dissolution of the universe by the mind
alone.
Bhagavān: The origin, dissolution, the bondage and
559. salvation of creatures, knowledge, ignorance – one who
knows all these is Bhagavan.
560. Bhagahā: One who withdraws the Bhagas, beginning with
561. lordliness, into Himself at the time of dissolution.
Ānandī: One whose nature is Ananda (bliss).
Vanamālī: One who wears the floral wreath (Vanamala)
562. called Vaijayanti, which consists of the categories of five
elements.
Hala or ploughshare as His weapon.
Vamana.
orb.
cold.
all, and the greatest of all beings.
567. Sudhanvā: One who has got as His weapon the bow named
Saranga of great excellence.
the evil path.
devotees.
everything in its ambit.
master of all learning. He is Ayonija because He was not born
of a mother. This forms a noun in combination with the
attribute.
575. Trisāmā: One who is praised by the chanters of Sama-gana
576. through the three Samas known as Devavratam.
Sāma: Among the Vedas, I am Sama Veda.
the nature of supreme bliss.
Sanyasa for the attainment of Moksha.
as the most important discipline for Sannyasins (ascetics).
the world.
time of Pralaya.
ignorance. That is Brahman.
there is no return to lower states.
from attachment, antagonism, etc.
creative cycle.
water, so 'Kuvala' means water. One who lies in water is
Kuvalesaya. 'Kuvala' also means the underside of serpents.
One wholies on a serpent, known as Adisesha, is Kuvalesaya.
Govardhana in His incarnation as Krishna.
593. Gōptā: One who is the protector of the earth. Or one who
hides Himself by His Maya.
devotees. Vrushabha means Dharma and so one whose look is
Dharma.
597. Anivartī: One who never retreats in the battle with Asuras.
Or one who, being devoted to Dharma, never abandons it.
the objects of senses.
contracts the expansive universe into a subtle state.
that go to him.
His name.
603. Shrivasta.
ocean Shridevi chose as her consort, rejecting all other
604. Devas and Asuras. Or Shri mean supreme Cosmic Power.
The Lord is the master of that Power.
Brahma who are endowed with power and wealth of the
Vedas.
and power. He who dwells in such men is Shrinivasa.
powers.
and virtue according to their Karma.
mother of all.
612. think about Him and worship Him – into virtuous and
powerful beings.
613. decaying good and happiness. Such a state is the nature of
the Lord.
614. Śrīmān: One in whom there are all forms of Shri that is
power, virtue, beauty etc.
worlds.
617. flowers.
supreme bliss.
Jyotirgana.
621. Vijitātmā: One who has conquered the Atma that is the
mind.
622. Vidheyātmā: One whose form or nature cannot be
623. determined as 'only this'.
clear to him like a fruit in the palm.
627. consciousness, can see everthing in all directions.
unchanging.
to Lanka, had to sleep on the ground of the sea-beach.
various incarnations.
is the source of all glorious manifestations.
all sorrow.
even by mere remembrance.
moon and other bodies are endowed with rays of light.
635. Devas who are themselves the objects of worship in all the
worlds.
pot.
Viśuddhātmā: Being above the three Gunas, Satva, Rajas and
637. Tamas, the Lord is pure spirit and is also free from all
impurities.
remembrance.
cannot be obstructed by enemies.
antagonist to confront.
and sacred order. Or one of the four Vyuhas.
prowess cannot be obstructed by any one.
643. Kālanemi-nihā: One who destroyed the Asura named
644. Kalanemi.
controls even great powers like Indra and others.
647. Trilōkātmā: One who in his capacity as the inner pervade is
the soul for the three worlds.
everything in the three words is functioning.
650. within the orbit of the sun.
Keśihā: One who destroyed the Asura named Keshi.
the cycle of birth and death along with ignorance, its cause.
four values of life – Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha.
654. of people endowed with desires.
Kāmī: One who by nature has all his desires satisfied.
one who effects the 'Anta' or dissolution of 'Ka' or Brahma
655. at the end of a Dviparardha (the period of Brahma's lifetime
extending over a hundred divine years).
and Agama.
Gunas, His form cannot be determined.
659. over the earth.
660. is the soul of all, and who cannot be limited by space, time,
location, etc.
the kingdoms in the four quarters he acquired great wealth.
58Arjuna is a Vibhuti, a glorious manifestation of the Lord.
662. indicated by the word Brahma. As the Lord promotes these,
663. He is called Brahmanya.
Brahmā: One who creates everything as the creator Brahma.
Brahma: Being big expanding, the Lord who is known from
665. indications like Satya (Truth), is called Brahma. Or Brahma
is Truth, Knowledge and Infinity!
etc.
667. Brahmavid: One who knows the Vedas and their real
meaning.
668. the whole world, saying, 'It is commanded so and so in the
Veda'.
Brahmī: One in whom is established such entities as Tapas,
669. Veda, mind, Prana etc. which are parts of Brahma and which
670. are also called Brahma.
enormous strides bestow on us happiness.
673. Mahākarmā: One who is performing great works like the
creation of the world.
674. luminaries derive their brilliance. Or one who is endowed
675. with the brilliance of various excellences.
677. Mahāyajvā: One who is great and performs sacrifices for the
678. good of the world.
offered as sacrificial offering (Havis) into the fire of the Self,
which is Brahman.
681. who never praises any other being.
683. attributes and names of the Lord.
684. Stōtā: One who, being all -formed, is also the person who
sings a hymn of praise.
the world, and for the purpose always sports in His hands
the five weapons, the discus Sudarshana, the mace
685. Kaumodaki, the bow Saranga, and the sword Nandaka
besides the conch Panchajanya.
powers and excellences.
Pūrayitā: One who is not only self-fulfilled but gives all
fulfillments to others.
erased.
of conferring great merit on others.
born of cause, internal or external.
endowed with speed likes that of the mind.
693. knowledge or skill.
694. He is really the master of all wealth, and others who seem to
be so are in those positions only because of His grace.
696. all wealth, namely Moksha.
endowed with intelligence of great excellence.
the world.
Sattā: Experience that is without any difference of an
702. external nature from similar objects or dissimilar objects as
also internal differences is called Satta.
703. conscousness, who is unsublatable and who manifests
Himself in many ways.
holy men who have realized the Truth.
706. Hanuman.
persons associated with the river Yamuna like Devaki,
Vasudeva, Nandagopa, Yasoda, Balabhadra, Subhadra, etc.
Maya.
712. energy or Prana of all living beings dissolves.
713. Darpahā: One who puts down the pride of persons who
walk along the unrighteous path.
714. righteousness with a sense of self-respect regarding their
way of life.
own inherent bliss.
orcontained in the heart in meditation.
enemies like attachment and by external enemies like
Asuras.
viśvamūrtirmahāmūrtirdīptamūrtiramūrtimān,
universe as His body.
720. bedstead constituted of the serpent Adisesha.
Amūrtimān: He who is without a body born of Karma.
incarnations as it pleases Him in or to help the world.
even though He has many forms.
724. Consciousness, assumes different forms for temporary
purposes.
that He has several forms.
or that relate to similar objects external or to dissimilar
objects.
one who is hymned as constituted of joy.
730. Kim: One who is fit to be contemplated upon, because He is
the summation of all values.
731. Yat: One who is by nature existent. The word 'Yat' indicates
732. a self-subsisting entity.
Tat: Brahma is so called because He 'expands'.
Padamanuttamam: Braman is 'Pada' or Status, because He is
733. the goal of all Moksha-seekers. It is Anuttama, because It is
734. that beyond which there is nothing else to be attained.
736. Lokanāthah: One to whom all the worlds pray.
generate joy.
742. Vīrahā: One who destroyed heroes (Viras) like
Kiranyakashipu for protecting Dharma.
comparable to Him by any characteristic.
745. Sunya (emptiness).
Truth, Intelligence and Infinity.
Amānī: He who, being of the nature of Pure Consciousness,
748. has no sense of identification with anything that is not
Atman.
of self in non-self. Or one who has regard and beneficence
749. towards devotees. Or one who destroys in the knowing ones
the sense of identification with the non-self.
751. God of all.
752. Lokasvāmī: One who is the Lord of all the fourteen spheres.
756. self-satisfied.
like Adisesha.
all times.
bearing arms.
762. great delight.
764. attentive (Vyagra) in granting the prayers of devotees.
Or one who is the elder brother of Gada.
caturātmā caturbhāvaścaturvedavidekapāt. (82)
766. Avyakruta, and Turiya. Or one with four horns with colours
white, red, yellow and black.
768. described.
of life and four Varnas ordained by the scriptures.
Caturātmā: One whose self is specially endowed with
770. puissance, because it is without any attachment,
antagonism, etc.
human values – Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha.
772. Catur-vedavid: One who understands the true meaning of
the four Vedas.
Ekapāt: One with a single Pada, part or leg. Or one with a
single foot or manifestation.
durlabhō durgamō durgō durāvāsō durārihā. (83)
Samsara.
775. Anivrutātmā: One who is not Nivruta (separated from)
776. anything or anywhere, because He is all-pervading.
objects like sun do not dare to oppose His command.
779. difficult for a person to be endowed with.
by various obstructions.
bring to reside in their hearts in Samadhi.
Durārihā: One who destroys beings like Asuras.
upon.
grasps the essence of the world.
Him, the Lord is called Sutantu.
web of this world.
787. Indra-karmā: One whose actions are like that of Indra, that
is, are of a highly commendable nature.
788. Mahākarmā: One of whom the great elements like Akasha
are effects.
nothing more to accomplish.
of the Veda.
out of His own will.
surprises everyone.
(Undanam).
is very beautiful.
everything.
Brahma who are themselves objects of worship.
entreat Him.
799. assumed the form of a fish having prominent antenna.
Sarvavijjayī: The Lord is 'Sarvavit' as He has knowledge of
everything. He is 'Jayi' because He is the conqueror of all the
inner forces like attachment, anger etc., as also of external
foes like Hiranyaksha.
to gold in brilliance.
attachment and aversion, by objects of the senses like
802. sound, taste, etc., and by Asuras the antagonists of the
Devas.
of learning, including Brahma.
being the paramatman who is of the nature of Bliss, the
804. Yogis who contemplate upon Him dip themselves in that
lake of Bliss and attain to great joy.
pit.
time – past, present and future.
support. He is Mahan or a great one and 'Nidhi', the most
precious one.
the earth by freeing it of its burdens is Kumuda.
jasmine.
Jasmine.
cloud in extinguishing the three Tapas (heats, that is,
811. miseries) arising from psychological, material and spiritual
causes. Or one who rains all desires like a cloud.
attains purity.
813. inducement is Anila. Ilana also means sleep. So one who
sleeps not or is ever awake is Anila.
which is His own nature.
816. undecaying.
leaf, flower, and fruits etc., with devotion.
819. offerings. It can also mean one who is a non-enjoyer, that is,
a mere witness.
821. omnipotent and unobstructed by any other will.
822. Śatrujit: Conqueror of all forces of evil.
downward. That is, He is the source of everything that is
manifest.
825. sky', that is, superior to all.
fighter Chanura belonging to the race of Andhra.
conceived as having seven tongues of flame.
Edhas or forms of brilliance.
831. seven horses as his vehicles or mounts.
Achintyo: One who is not determinable by any criteria of
832. knowledge, being Himself the witnessing Self- certifying all
833. knowledge.
the evil path. Or one who cuts at the root of all fear.
described as Stula or huge.
because in the creative cycle of creation, sustentation, and
840. dissolution, He is the support of the Gunas – Satva, Rajas
841. and Tamas – with which these functions are performed.
Mahān: The great.
843. agencies, like Pruthvi (Earth), is not supported by anything
844. external to Him.
the inside of a lotus flower.
846. lines of still others, but the Lord's descendent, namely, the
world system, is not preceded by anything else.
world-system, which is His off-spring.
the form of Ananta.
or one of whom all Vedas speak.
Yogī: Yoga here means knowledge. So He who is attained by
that is Yogi. Or Yoga means Samadhi. He who is ever
850. established in His own Self, that is, the Paramatma. He is
therefore Yogi.
and establishment in His own Self, unlike ordinary Yogis
who slip away from Yoga on account of obstacles.
wandering in the forest of Samsara.
855. without using their discriminative power.
856. of Samsara has excellent leaves (Parna) in the form of Vedic
passages (Chandas).
beings.
860. Dasharatha, was the master of the science of archery.
861. Damayitā: He who inflicts punishments on people as Yama
and as king.
863. result of enforcement.
865. Niyantā: One who appoints every person to his respective
duties.
866. law, or above whom there can be no overlord to enforce
anything, as He is the controller of everything.
who has no death.
868. Satvavān: One who has got the strengthening qualities like
heroism, prowess, etc.
870. Guna.
truthfulness and righteousness in its many aspects.
the ultimate values of life (Purushartha).
oneself, are fit to be offered.
874. ingredients and rites of worship like offerings, praise,
prostration, etc.
what is good and dear to those who worship Him.
that reveals oneself as well as other things.
attractive nature.
Hutabhuk: One who eats, that is, receives, whatever is
offered to whatever deities (Devas) in all sacrifices.
master of all the three worlds.
883. Sun.
885. Agni (Fire) is what is called Surya.
Savitā: One who brings forth (Prasava) all the worlds.
indeterminable by space and time.
888. Hutabhuk: One who consumes what is offered in fire
sacrifices.
889. Bhoktā: One to whom the unconscious Prakruti is the object
for enjoyment.
devotees.
preservation of Dharma.
Hiranyagarbha.
893. secured all his desires and has no obstruction in the way of
894. such achievement.
support for Himself, supports all the three worlds.
897. Sanāt: The word Sanat indicates a great length of time. Time
also is the manifestation of the Supreme Being.
898. than Brahma and other beings, who are generally
considered eternal.
in colour.
water by his Kapi, that is, the sun.
902. Pralaya.
904. Svasti: One whose auspicious form is characterized by
supreme Bliss.
905. Svastibhuk: One who enjoys the Svasti mentioned above or
who preserves the Svasti of devotees.
(auspiciousness).
Raudra. The Lord is one whose desires are all accomplished,
907. so He has no attachment or aversion. So He is free from the
Raudras mentioned above.
Cakrī: One who sports in his hand the discus named
909. Sudarshana, which is the category known as Manas, for the
910. protection of all the worlds.
Vikramī: Vikrama means taking a stride, as also courage.
and smrutis are of an extremely sublime nature.
912. because He has none of the characteristics, which could be
913. grasped by sound.
914. the three types of wordly fires – sufferings arising from
material causes, psychological causes and spiritual causes.
Sarvari (night) and for an enlightened one the state of
samsara is like night (Sarvari). So the Lord is called the one
who generates Sarvari or night for both the enlightened and
the bound ones.
mind, word and body.
quickly, such a person is Daksha.
Nama.
because He is more patient than all Yogis noted for patience.
inclusive knowledge of everything.
all, is free from the fear of trnsmigratory life.
sing of whom is meritorious.
the ocean of Samsara.
one who destroys those who perform evil.
and adore Him.
927. saves one from dreams foreboding danger. Hence He is
called so.
Vīrahā: One who frees Jivas from bondage and thus saves
928. them from the various transmigratory paths by bestowing
liberation on them.
the three worlds.
931. men (Santah).
this universe.
934. dwells in this all-comprehending universe.
Samsara.
938. the fruits of their Karma.
Gabhirātmā: One whose nature is unfathomable.
persons differing in their forms according to competency.
directions according to their varied functions.
of their ritualistic actions on different beings.
ultimate cause of all.
943. (Bhu) of even the earth, which is known to support all
things.
945. the earth besides being its supporter.
949. Jivas that come to have embodiment.
incarnations were a cause of fear for the Asuras.
951. supporting factors like the five elements – Ether, Air, Fire,
Water and Earth.
952. Adhātā: One who is one's own support and therefore does
not require another support.
resembles the Hasa or blooming of buds into flowers.
955. eternal Awareness.
case of Parikshit.
958. Brahman. As He is inseparably related with Pranava, He is
called Pranava.
So one who bestows the fruits of Karma on all according to
their Karma.
Consciousness.
(Anna).
Vayus (airs) known as Prana, Apana etc.
965. Paramartha, etc.
Tatvavid: One who knowns His own true nature.
966. Ekātmā: One who is the sole being and the spirit (Atma) in
all.
subject to the six kinds of transformations – being born,
existing, temporarily, growing, transforming, decaying and
dying.
Svah are said to be the essence of the Veda.
970. Samsara.
Savitā: He who generates all the worlds.
972. therefore the grandfather of all.
974. Yajnas.
Yajvā: One who manifests as the performer of a Yajna.
Boar are identified with the parts of a yajna.
various fruits.
supporter of all Yajna.
979. of the world.
Yajñi: One who is the Principal.
980. Yajñabhug: One who is the enjoyer of Yajna or Protector of
981. Yajna.
Yayajñaguhyam: The Gyana Yajna or the sacrifice of
983. knowledge, which is the esoteric (Guhyam) of all the
Yajnams.
984. Annam: That which is eaten by living beings. Or He who eats
all beings.
The word Eva is added to show that He is also Anna, the
food eaten.
987. material cause other than Himself for the universe.
form.
991. Krishna.
Him, meditate upon Him, remember and sing hymns of
praise on Him.
994. Panchajanya, which stands for Tamasahamkara, of which
the five elements are born.
995. Nandakī: One who has in His hand the sword known as
Nandaka, which stands for Vidya (spiritual illumination).
Cakri: One who sports the discus known as Sudarshana,
996. which stands for the Rajasahamkara, out of which the
997. Indriyas have come.
999. Kaumodaki, which stands for the category of Buddhi.
He controls all the above-mentioned weapons.
has got only the above- mentioned weapons. All things,
which can be used for contacting or striking, are His
weapons.
(Chant this shloka 3 times)
Protect us Oh Lord Narayana
Who wears the forest garland,
Who has the mace, conch, sword and the wheel.
And who is called Vishnu and the Vasudeva.
PHALASHRUTHI
Bhishma said:
Thus was told, all the holy thousand names of Kesava, who is
great.
He who hears this daily and whoever recites it shall not attain to
any evil, he shall be protected in this world and in the next.
The Brahmin will get knowledge, the Kshatriya will get victory,
the Vaisya will get wealth, the Shudra will get pleasures by
reading these.
dharmārthī prāpnuyāddharmam arthārthī cārthamāpnuyāt.
kāmānavāpnuyātkāmī prajārthī prāpnuyātprajām. (4)
He who seeks righteousness obtains righteousness, and he who
seeks wealth obtains wealth; he who seeks progeny obtains his
desires.
Whichever devoted man, getting up early in the morning and
purifying himself, repeats this hymn devoted to Vasudeva, with a
mind that is concentrated on Him...
That man attains to great fame, leadership among his peers,
wealth that is secure and the supreme good unsupassed by
anything...
H e will be free from all fears and be endowed with great courage
and energy and he will be free from diseases.
rōgārtō mucyate rōgādbaddhō mucyeta bandhanāt,
Beauty of form, strength of body and mind, and virtuous
character will be natural to him.
A man quickly crosses over difficulties by praising the Supreme
Person with a thousand names, ever accompanied by devotion.
sarvapāpaviśuddhātmā yāti brahma sanātanam. (10)
A mortal who takes refuge in Vāsudeva and is devoted to
Vāsudeva, purified of all sins, attains to the eternal Brahman.
There is nothing inauspicious for the devotees of Vāsudeva. They
are not afraid of birth, death, old age or disease.
One who studies this hymn with faith and devotion will be
endowed with happiness, forbearance, prosperity, patience,
memory and fame.
The devotee of the Lord Purushottama, has neither anger nor
fear,
nor avarice and nor bad thoughts.
The heavens, the moon, the sun, the stars, the sky, the directions,
the earth and the ocean are sustained by the might of the great
soul Vasudeva.
All this world, that which moves and moves not, and which has
Devas, Rakshasas and Gandharwas, and also Asuras and Nagas,
are under the control of Lord Krishna.
The senses, mind, intellect, Sattva, splendour, strength and
patience
are said to be composed of Vasudeva, the field and the knower of
the field.
88The conduct of all the Vedas is first conceived as the origin of
conduct, the Dharma, the Lord of Dharma, the infallible.
The sages, the forefathers, the gods, the great beings, the metals,
the movable and the immovable, this universe is born of
Narayana.
actions, the Vedas, the scriptures and knowledge, all this comes
from Janardana.
Vishnu alone, the Great Being, pervading the three worlds with
many separate beings, the Soul of beings, enjoys the expanse of
the Enjoyer of the universe.
Any man who desires to attain prosperity and happiness should
recite this hymn of Lord Vishnu recited by Vyasa.
Those who worship the lotus-eyed Lord of the universe, the
unborn God, the Lord of the universe, the inexhaustible, do not
get defeated.
arjuna uvāca:
Om Namah Arjuna said — O lotus-petalled, large-eyed, lotus-
naveled, best of the gods, be the savior of the devotees who are
devoted to you, O Janardana.
śrī bhagavānuvāca:
The Lord said:
He who likes, Oh Arjuna, to sing my praise, using these thousand
names, should know Arjuna, that I would be satisfied By his
singing of even one stanza, without any doubt. Om Nama,
without any doubt.
vyāsa uvāca:
sarvabhūtanivāsōsi vāsudēva namōstu tē. (25)
Vyasa said:
My salutations to you Vasudeva, because you who live in all the
worlds make these worlds as places where beings live, and also
V asudeva, You live in all beings as their soul.
Om Nama salutations to Vasudeva.
91pārvatyuvāca:
Parvathi said:
I am desirous to know, Oh Lord, how the scholars of this world
w ill chant without fail these thousand names, by a method that
is easy and quick.
īśvara uvāca:
rīrāma rāma rāmēti ramē rāmē manōramē,
(Chant this shloka 3 times)
Lord Shiva said:
Hey beautiful one, I play with Rama always, by chanting Rama
Rama and Rama. Hey lady with a beautiful face, chanting of the
name Rama, is same as the thousand names. Om Nama Rama
Nama Rama.
92brahmōvāca:
Brahma said:
Salutations to Thee, Oh lord, Who runs the immeasurable time of
thousands of crore yugas, Who has no end, Who has a thousand
names, Who has a thousand forms, Who has a thousand feet,
Who has a thousand eyes, Who has a thousand heads, Who has a
thousand arms, and Who is always there. Om Nama He who runs
thousands of crore yugas.
sanjaya uvāca:
tatra śrīrvijayō bhūtirdhruvā nītirmatirmama. (29)
Sanjaya said:
Where Krishna, the king of Yogas, and where the wielder of bow,
Arjuna, is there, there will exist all the good, all the the victory,
all the fame, and all the justice in this world.
śrībhagavānuvāca:
93Sri Bhagavan said:
I would take care of worries and cares of him who thinks and
serves Me without any other thoughts.
I save the righteous and destroy the wicked, and establish
righteousness in every age.
If he who is worried, sad, broken, afraid, severely ill, if he who
h as heard tidings bad, sings Narayana and Narayana, all his
cares would be taken care of.
svabhāvāt,
Whatever I do either by body, speech, mind or sensory organs,
e ither with my personal knowledge or natural trait, I surrender
and submit all to that to supreme divine Narayana.
This is the complete Divya Sahasranama Stotram of Sri Vishnu.
Om Tat Sat.